Automatic Catchphrase Identification
from Legal Court Case Documents
Arpan Mandal
IIEST Shibpur, India
Kripabandhu Ghosh
IIT Kanpur, India
Arindam Pal
TCS Research, India
Saptarshi Ghosh
IIT Kharagpur, India; IIEST Shibpur, India
ABSTRACT
Automatically identifying catchphrases from legal court case doc-
uments is an important problem in Legal Information Retrieval,
which has not been extensively studied. In this work, we pro-
pose an unsupervised approach for extraction and ranking of catch-
phrases from court case documents, by focusing on noun phrases.
Using a dataset of gold standard catchphrases created by legal ex-
perts from real-life court documents, we compare the proposed
approach with several unsupervised and supervised baselines. We
show that the proposed methodology achieves statistically signifi-
cantly better performance compared to all the baselines.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Information systems →Information retrieval;
KEYWORDS
Legal IR; Catchphrase extraction; Court cases
1 INTRODUCTION
In countries following the Common Law system, in an ongoing le-
gal case, great emphasis is given on prior cases / precedences, on
the principle that similar facts must not be differently interpreted
on repeated occurrence.1 In such legal systems, this reliance on
precedences makes it critical for legal practitioners to find and
study older cases, in order to analyze how the issues related to
the current case were discussed and ruled in preceding cases.
The ever-increasing volume of legal text makes information ac-
cess from them challenging for legal practitioners. Court case de-
scriptions are usually long and contain complex sentences [1], which
makes thorough reading strenuous and time-consuming. So, it is
essential for legal practitioners to have systems which can auto-
matically provide a gist of the legal concepts in the whole case.
To this end, identification of catchphrases or catchwords [4] from
legal documents is of particular interest (the terms catchphrases
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_law as seen on 23rd May, 2017.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy other-
wise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CIKM’17 , November 6–10, 2017, Singapore
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
978-1-4503-4918-5/17/11…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3132847.3133102
and catchwords will be used interchangeably in this paper).2 Catch-
phrases can crucially help the lawyers in quickly understanding
the underlying legal concepts pertaining to a case. Till now, catch-
phrase identification from legal documents is mostly done man-
ually by legal experts. For instance, the Manupatra legal search
system (http://www.manupatra.co.in/), which is popular among le-
gal practitioners in India, provides manually extracted catchwords
for the cases in the important law courts in India. However, as the
number of legal documents available online is increasing, it is be-
coming difficult for legal experts to manually extract catchwords
from the huge number of documents. In such situations, method-
ologies for automated extraction of catchwords are essential.
Challenges: Automatic identification of legal catchphrases is a
challenging problem. To give an idea of the challenging nature
of the problem, Table 1 shows three example cases from the Manu-
patra online legal search system, showing their unique case ids and
some catchphrases chosen by legal experts. For example 1953.INSC.24
is the Case id of the case titled “THE STATE OF BOMBAY & ANR
V. THE UNITED MOTORS (INDIA) LTD. & ORS” (URL given in
the Table). For this case, some example catchphrases are ‘Appro-
priate’, ‘Assessment’, etc. Catchphrases occur in low numbers in
court case documents and some of them can occur in only a few
documents in a large collection. They are of variable lengths, typ-
ically as n-grams where n can be as large as 7. Additionally, the
presence of stopwords in catchphrases like ‘Directive Principle of
State Policy’, ‘Adventure in the Nature of Trade’ etc., prohibits the
conventional removal of stopwords as a pre-processing step prior
to retrieval. All these characteristics of legal catchphrases hint at
exploration beyond traditional IR techniques.
Prior work: To our knowledge, there is only one prior work which
attempted to automatically extract catchwords from legal docu-
ments. Galgani et al. [3] reported a work on identification of sen-
tences containing catchphrases and evaluation of the underlying
mechanism. However, their goal was to summarize the documents,
and for that, it was sufficient to extract the sentences containing
the catchwords. We focus on a different problem – automatic iden-
tification of the exact catchphrases from a given court case. Ad-
ditionally, we show that our proposed approach achieves better
extraction of legal catchphrases than the method in [3], applied
specifically for identifying catchphrases.
Present work: In this paper, we propose an automated method-
ology for extraction of catchwords from legal documents. We also
2https://www.irwinlaw.com/cold/catchwordsShort PaperCIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore2187
Case Id Catchphrases
1953.INSC.24
http://liiofindia.org/in/cases/cen/
INSC/1953/24.html
Actual Delivery, Advocate-General, Alternative Remedy, Appropriate, Assessment, Car-
rier, Carrying on Business, Cause of Action, Commencement of the Constitution, Com-
petent Legislature, Consignment, Constitution of India, Constitutional Validity, Consump-
tion, Contract, Contract of Sale, Contravention, Cost, Dealer, Declared by Parliament, De-
duction, Definition, Delegate, Demand Notice, Despatch, Discrimination, Discriminatory,
Double Taxation, Existing Law, Export, Federal Court, Freedom of Trade
1991.INSC.12
http://liiofindia.org/in/cases/cen/
INSC/1991/12.html
Advisory Board, Allowance, Appropriate Government, Arrest, Constitutional Obligation,
Constitutional Question, Constitutional Safeguard, Detaining Authority, Detention, De-
tenu, Duty of the State, Earliest Opportunity, General Clauses Act, Grounds of Detention,
Guarantee, Legal Obligation, Liberty, Order of Detention
1983.INSC.27
http://liiofindia.org/in/cases/cen/
INSC/1983/37.html
Commutation, Confinement, Conspiracy, Constitution of India, Death Sentence, Funda-
mental Right, Imposition of Death Sentence, Judicial Proceeding, Life Imprisonment, Soli-
tary Confinement, Speedy Trial, Transportation for Life
Table 1: Examples of Indian Supreme Court cases and catchphrases taken from the Manupatra legal expert system
propose a novel scoring function for ranking the extracted catch-
phrases. We perform experiments over a dataset of 400 case doc-
uments from the Supreme Court of India cases (archived at http:
//liiofindia.org/in/cases/cen/INSC/), and gold standard catchwords
identified manually by legal experts in the Manupatra legal search
system.
We compare our approach with a supervised keyphrase extrac-
tion tool, Kea [9] and several unsupervised term-weighting base-
lines. We show that our proposed unsupervised methodologies
statistically significantly outperform all the standard baselines.
2 METHODOLOGIES FOR CATCHPHRASE
EXTRACTION
The task of automatic catchphrase extraction from a given set of
documents can be decomposed into the two following sub-tasks:
(1) Selection of candidate catchphrases: In this step, for a given
document, we look to identify parts of the document text which
can act as potential catchphrases.
(2) Scoring and ranking of candidate catchphrases: In this
step, we assign scores to the candidate phrases and rank them on
the basis of these scores. We propose a novel algorithm to score
the candidate phrases.
We now describe methodologies for automatic extraction of catch-
phrases from legal documents (specifically, court case descriptions
from the Supreme Court of India).
2.1 Selection of candidate catchphrases
Through manual inspection, we conjectured that most of the catch-
phrases in legal documents are noun phrases. To strengthen our
conjecture, we consulted some legal experts, who confirmed that
many of the important catchphrases in legal case documents are
noun phrases. For empirical verification, we viewed catchphrase
extraction task as a pattern matching problem and experimented
with various types of patterns that are likely to match legal catch-
phrases. We extracted (i) word n-grams (n = 1, 2, . . . , 7), and
(ii) noun phrases from legal texts, and checked which type of pat-
terns match better with catchphrases that are actually identified
by legal experts (using our dataset described in the introductory
section). We achieved a much higher recall in identifying catch-
phrases by using noun phrases as candidate phrases.
Hence, noun phrases were extracted using a standard noun phrase
chunker.3 Extraction of noun phrases requires a grammar that de-
fines the structure of a noun phrase in terms of the parts-of-speech
(POS) tags of the constituent words. The structure of a noun phrase
in English can be quite complex [2]. For the purpose of extracting
legal catchphrases, we used a simplified version of the grammar
in [2], involving only adjectives, nouns and prepositions.
The patterns extracted from a document can be in singular or
plural senses, while legal catchphrases are usually in singular (e.g.,
‘Fundamental Right’ and ‘Legal Obligation’, and not ‘Fundamental
Rights’ or ‘Legal Obligations’). Hence, we adopt the following ap-
proach. We first use a Parts-of-Speech (POS) tagger to identify the
nouns in the extracted patterns, and then use lemmatization on the
nouns, to remove the inflectional endings. Note that we perform
lemmatization only on the nouns, and not on other words, since in-
flectional endings in adjectives are often parts of legal catchphrases
(e.g., ‘Constitutional Validity’, ‘Discriminatory Evidence’).
2.2 Scoring of the selected candidate phrases
After the extraction of candidate phrases from a particular docu-
ment d, we rank them based on a scoring technique. We describe
below some standard scoring methods, which we consider as base-
lines. We also present our proposed scoring scheme thereafter.
Most of these schemes are designed on TF-IDF based scoring which
has been conventionally used for scoring query terms; here we use
it for scoring noun phrases instead. We use a number of notations
in the rest of this section, that are defined in Table 2.
(1) BM25 : The BM25 function is well-known for scoring docu-
ments with respect to a given query [5]. Here we use this function
for assigning score to an extracted candidate phrase c in a given
document d. We use the following scoring function to assign score
to our candidate phrases:
Score(c, d) = IDF (c) · T F (c, d) · (k1 + 1)
T F (c, d) + k1 · (1 − b + b · |d |
avдdl )
(1)
3We used the Python Natural Language Toolkit for noun phrase chunking (http://
www.nltk.org/howto/chunk.html) as well as for subsequent steps like POS tagging
and lemmatization.Short PaperCIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore2188
Notation Meaning
c a multi-word candidate phrase
|c | number of words in a candidate phrase
t A term or a single word
ti the ith term in a multi-word candidate phrase
d a single document
|d | length of a document in words
C collection of documents of any domain
Cl collection of documents of the legal domain
Cnl collection of documents of a non-legal domain
D manually constructed legal dictionary
n total number of documents in the corpus
avдdl average of all document lengths in the corpus
Table 2: Notations used for describing the scoring methods.
where T F (c, d) is the frequency of the candidate phrase c in doc-
ument d. k1 and b are free parameters whose values we choose
as k1 ∈ [1.2, 2.0] and b = 0.75.4 IDF (c) is the inverse document
frequency of the candidate phrase c, calculated as:
IDF (c) = log n − DF (c) + 0.5
DF (c) + 0.5 (2)
where DF (c) (Document Frequency) is the number of documents
in which the the phrase c occurs in the collection.
(2) KLIP: This is a KL-divergence based score [7, 8], where the
final score is a sum of two different scores – (1) KL informativeness
(KLI ), and (2) KL phraseness (KLP).
The KLI score measures how well does a candidate phrase c rep-
resent a document d. It is calculated as:
KLI (c, d) = T F (c, d)
|d | · log
(T F (c,d)
|d | )
( C F (c)
n )
(3)
where, CF (c) is the total number of occurrences of c in the whole
corpus.
On the other hand, the KLP score is meant specifically for multi-
word phrases. It compensates for the low frequency of multi-word
phrases by assigning higher weights to longer phrases:
KLP(c, d) = T F (c, d)
|d | · log
(T F (c,d)
|d | )
∏|c |
i=1 ( F r eq(ti ,d)
|d | )
(4)
where ti is the ith unigram of the phrase c, and Freq(ti , d) is the
frequency of the unigram ti in document d.
(3) MyScore: This score is generated by an unsupervised method
described in [3] for ranking sentences containing catchphrases in
legal documents. For our purpose, rather than scoring sentences
we scored the candidate phrases. MyScore is a combination of three
scores — TF-IDF, TF, and a new score named NOccur. In this new
metric NOccur, firstly the important sentences are marked within
a document. Hence, the words that appear in these important sen-
tences are weighted higher than the remaining words. We consider
this baseline since, to the best of our knowlodge, this is the only
previous work adjacent to our problem in the legal domain.
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Okapi_BM25 as seen on 23rd May, 2017.
(4) Proposed: We propose a novel technique which aims at esti-
mating the importance of a term specifically in the legal domain
relative to a non-legal domain. To this end, we represent the non-
legal domain using a collection of documents from the famous 20
Newsgroups dataset that comprises of around 18,000 newsgroup
posts on 20 different topics.5 Now, for each term we try to find
out its importance in both the legal and non-legal domains. We
measure the importance of term t in a domain C as follows:
Importance(t, C) = CF (t, C)
DF (t, C) + 1 (5)
where, CF (t, C) is the collection frequency of the term t in corpus
C, and DF (t, C) is the number of documents in C that the term t
occurs in.
We wish to have a scoring where terms that are more impor-
tant in legal domain and less important in non-legal domain, get a
higher score. Hence, we use the following scoring function:
Score(t, Cl , Cnl ) = Importance(t, Cl )
Importance(t, Cnl ) + 1 (6)
where Cl and Cnl are the legal and non-legal corpus respectively.
It is to be noted that, whenever a term from Cl is not present in
Cnl , its importance in Cnl equates to zero.
Now that our terms are assigned scores, we need to finally com-
pute the scores of our candidate phrases. To do so, we average the
above score for all terms in the phrase and take a natural logarithm
of it. Then, we multiply the KLI score of the phrase with this sum.
The final score, denoted by PS, is defined as:
PS(c, Cl , Cnl ) = log[
|c |∑
i=1
Score(ti , Cl , Cnl )] · KLI (c, d) (7)
where ti is the ith term of the candidate phrase c. So, PS is the
product of two terms. One of them is the KLI score calculated just
as in KLIP method. The KLI term gives the specificity of a term in
a given document, whereas the other term gives the specificity of
the term in the legal domain.
Explicitly considering legal terms in scoring: We also consider a vari-
ant of our proposed method, by adding more importance to the can-
didate phrases that contains a legal phrase. We compiled a large
dictionary of legal terms, obtained from several online sources.6
The set of legal terms mostly contains unigrams, bigrams, and tri-
grams, though there also n-grams with higher values of n. We
denote this legal dictionary by D. We define a legal term-based
score, PSLeдal as below:
PSLeдal(c, Cl , Cnl ) = PS(c, Cl , Cnl )(1 + |MAX Matchp ∈D(p, c)|
|c | )
(8)
where MAX Match denotes the maximum match the phrase c has
with any phrase p in the legal dictionary D. Note that, we consider
only those phrases p in D which are subsets of the phrase c. That is,
5The 20 Newsgroups dataset can be obtained from https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/
datasets/Twenty+Newsgroups.
6Legal terms were compiled from http://www.plainenglish.co.uk/files/legalguide.pdf,
http://www.legalindia.com/legal-word-or-phrase/, http://dakshindia.org/
common-legal-terms/.Short PaperCIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore2189
we are looking to reward those instances in this scoring function,
where a candidate phrase completely matches a legal phrase, or
contains a legal phrase. We ignore the cases where a candidate
phrase is a subset of a legal phrase, since this may wrongly up-
weight a non-legal phrase. For example, the candidate term India
is contained in the legal phrase Constitution of India but India is
not necessarily a legal term.
2.3 Supervised keyphrase extraction tool: KEA
KEA [9] is a state-of-the-art, machine learning based supervised
baseline which extracts phrases and ranks them.7 KEA needs some
training examples of documents with annotated keyphrases. From
these training examples, it learns a model for extraction of keyphrases,
which can then be applied on new documents. Details of the work-
ing of KEA can be found in [9].
We used KEA to extract catchphrases from the 400 legal doc-
uments that we have. For training KEA, we used 360 documents,
along with their Manupatra catchphrases extracted from these doc-
uments, as the training samples, and then used the learnt model to
extract keyphrases from the other 40 documents. This process was
repeated ten times, using 10-fold cross validation. Thus, KEA was
used to extract keyphrases from each document once. The perfor-
mance of KEA is reported in the next section.
3 EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
In this section, we present the results of the proposed method in
comparison with the baseline methods.
3.1 Experimental setup
As stated in the introductory section, we have the catchphrases
identified by the Manupatra legal expert system for a set of 400
Indian Supreme Court cases. From each document, we do the fol-
lowing. (i) We use our catchphrase extraction method described
in Section 2.1 to obtain candidate catchphrases. Then, we rank
the extracted catchphrases using our proposed ranking scheme
described in Section 2.2 as well as the baseline ranking methods.
(ii) We apply the supervised KEA tool which ranks the extracted
phrases [9]. Then we check to what extent Manupatra catchphrases
are correctly retrieved by these methods.
Evaluation measures: From a particular legal document, we ob-
tain a ranked list of extracted patterns, where the patterns are
ranked based on the various scores described in Section 2. The KEA
tool also gives a ranked list of the extracted keyphrases. We evalu-
ate the performance of a particular methodology by computing the
Mean Average precision (MAP) over the ranked list. For a particular
type of patterns, we report the mean of the Average Precision for
each document over the set of 400 documents. This measure ac-
counts for both Precision and Recall. We also report Precision@10,
Recall@100 and R-Precision averaged over all the 400 documents.
3.2 Results
Table 3 shows the performance of the different types of patterns,
averaged over the 400 legal documents. The proposed methods (PS
and PSLegal) statistically significantly outperform all the baselines
7The software can be downloaded from http://www.nzdl.org/Kea/.
Method Prec@10 Recall@100 R-Precision MAP
BM25 0.1345 0.3978 0.1218 0.1445
KLIP 0.1382 0.3816 0.1147 0.1471
KEA 0.1008 0.1861 0.0685 0.1043
MyScore 0.0088 0.1061 0.0136 0.0300
PS 0.1598BK E M 0.4121BK E M 0.1351BK E M 0.1752BK E M
PSLegal 0.1653BK E M 0.4153BK E M 0.1377BK E M 0.1770BK E M
Table 3: Performance of automatic catchphrase extraction
using different scoring methods. All measures are averaged
over 400 court case descriptions from the Indian Supreme
Court cases. Bold font shows the best value. The super-
scripts show significant improvements – B, K, E, and M in-
dicate that the proposed method is statistically significantly
better at 95% confidence interval (p < 0.05) than BM25, KLIP,
KEA and MyScore respectively.
in all the evaluation measures at 95% confidence interval (p −value
< 0.05) by Wilcoxon signed-rank test [6] .
When compared with each other, PSLegal numerically outper-
forms PS, but the difference is statistically significant (p − value <
0.05) only for Precision@10. Hence, incorporation of a legal dictio-
nary helps in retrieval of catchphrases, though the improvement
is not always substantial. The fact that the improvement is small
is primarily because a large fraction of catchwords are not legal
terms (e.g., ‘cost’, ‘dealer’, as shown in Table 1).
4 CONCLUSION
In this work, we developed unsupervised schemes for catchphrase
identification from legal documents. We introduce a new scoring
function to find the importance of a term in the legal domain, in
contrast to non-legal domains. Our proposed methodologies out-
perform several standard baselines.
In future, we plan to experiment with supervised schemes for
catchword extraction. Additionally, methodologies for automati-
cally extracting catchwords from legal documents have various po-
tential applications, such as indexing large legal databases, retriev-
ing relevant prior cases, summarizing legal documents [3], and so
on. We look forward to exploring these directions in future.
REFERENCES
[1] Stefanie Brüninghaus and Kevin D. Ashley. 2001. Improving the Representation
of Legal Case Texts with Information Extraction Methods. In Proc. Int’l Conf. on
Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL).
[2] eng-noun-phrase 2017. Grammatical Forms of English Noun Phrases. (2017).
http://www.linguisticsgirl.com/grammatical-forms-of-english-noun-phrases/.
[3] Filippo Galgani, Paul Compton, and Achim Hoffmann. 2012. Towards Auto-
matic Generation of Catchphrases for Legal Case Reports. In Proc. Int’l Conf. on
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing (CICLing).
[4] J.L.T. Olsson. 1999. Guide To Uniform Production of Judgments, 2nd edn. Aus-
tralian Institute of Judicial Administration, Carlton South (1999).
[5] Stephen E. Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. 2009. The Probabilistic Relevance
Framework: BM25 and Beyond. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval
3, 4 (2009), 333–389.
[6] S. Siegel. 1956. Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-
Hill.
[7] Takashi Tomokiyo and Matthew Hurst. 2003. A Language Model Approach to
Keyphrase Extraction. In Proc. ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analy-
sis, Acquisition and Treatment.
[8] Suzan Verberne, Maya Sappelli, Djoerd Hiemstra, and Wessel Kraaij. 2016. Eval-
uation and analysis of term scoring methods for term extraction. Information
Retrieval Journal 19, 5 (2016).
[9] Ian H. Witten, Gordon W. Paynter, Eibe Frank, Carl Gutwin, and Craig G. Nevill-
Manning. 1999. KEA: Practical Automatic Keyphrase Extraction. In Proc. ACM
Conference on Digital Libraries.Short PaperCIKM’17, November 6-10, 2017, Singapore2190